[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy [music] Aloway.
>> Tracy, you know, future economy is
always uncertain. path of the path of
inflation, path of employment, always
big debates. I think what's really
interesting right now compared to a few
years ago maybe is you know at various
times it's like inflation is going to
come down but there's a fight over how
fast right and now you have a situation
which
>> there are people who argue both sides
some people's like oh no we're on a you
know we're heading down the sort of
yield data camp etc and others are like
look we're reacelerating it's going to
get hot again and we're recording this
February 11th we just hit a fairly
strong jobs print etc and so some people
are making the reaceleration argument
We are so back so back. Well, that jobs
report, I mean, it was a blowout number.
So, 130,000 jobs added in January versus
expectations for 65,000. And even if you
drill down into it, like it looks pretty
good, right? But you're absolutely
right. So, we used to argue about how
far we would travel in one direction.
You know, inflation,
>> is it going to be 4%, is it going to be
5%, whatever. And now we're sort of
arguing about which direction we're
actually gonna go.
>> Totally. And I think like if you just
look like okay one jobs report can't you
know take it with a grain of salt there
is there does seem to be a lot of
evidence of some softening in the labor
market by a lot of different measures
etc. Housing market continues to be
fairly soft. On the other hand look at
various commodities you know look at
copper look at a bunch of other stuff.
Look at trucking prices freight picking
back up etc. I wrote about this in the
Odd Thoughts newsletter.
>> Yeah. There's uh lots of things that are
going in the other direction and you
would say, "Look, this looks like
reflation."
>> Yep. So, we are going to be speaking
with someone who had a non-consensus
call about a month ago, but again, I
think it's becoming maybe more consensus
by the day, by the hour as we get these
types of reports.
>> Totally. Well, we really do have the
perfect guest to sort of give us a
different take, a sort of I would say
it's still a little bit out of consensus
call, but um definitely um not the
direction that a lot of people want to
see. Definitely not the direction if you
think that the Fed should cut rapidly
this year. Maybe we'll talk some Fed
stuff. We're going to be speaking, of
course, to Adam Posen. He is the
president of the Peterson Institute and
recently co-authored a piece with uh
Peter Orsag. Uh 4% inflation. What? Uh
yeah, Adam, thanks for uh coming back
and joining us here in studio. 4%
inflation. Really?
>> Thanks, Tracy. Thanks, Joe, for having
me back. Yeah, I I mean, I've got
friends who say I should have just said
3.5 and that would have been enough out
of
Exactly. But I think it's realistic to
think about 4% by the end of the year on
headline CPI. And just going to the
spirit of what both of you were saying,
I I think the direction of travel is up,
not down and pretty clearly that way,
there's obviously, like you just said,
today's job report, but I think there's
a broader pattern. The the issue isn't,
you know, like you say, one month. It's
more about why the jobs report looks the
way it does. And if you look at prime
age, like you Tracy was saying about
drilling down in the numbers, if you
look at prime age labor force
participation, which to me is one of the
most important statistics you can look
at, it's still pretty high. And there's
this risk of women dropping out of the
labor force to look after kids and
elderly and sick people if they don't
restore some of the Obamacare insurance
subsidies. And there is a conundrum that
if you're either they haven't deported
yet or managed to drive out yet as many
migrants as they think or you're losing
labor there too. So it's hard for me to
see this as a very weak job market. the
the kinds of things people point to like
the slowing of wage growth or the
vacancies over as compared to
unemployment
I think are not indicative of a demand
side slowdown. They're indicative of
what economists call mismatch meaning
less good functioning in the labor
market. So, just to give you two quick
examples, African-American unemployment
is up relative to average unemployment.
Historically, for both nasty and good
reasons, that's been the case. But it
had come way down. So, the question is,
is it going up because they're the
canary in the coal mine, or is it
because something specific hit
African-Ameans? And unfortunately, I
think it's something specific
contributed to African-American
unemployment, which is Doge may not have
cut overall government spending, but it
massively reallocated where our
government spent. So, Department of
Education gone, a lot of environmental
gone, a lot of health and human services
gone. [snorts]
>> And these are things where you had a lot
of government contractors that were
African-Americanowned
or run or heavily populated. And so I
think part of the reason
African-American unemployment is up and
that doesn't mean it's okay. It just
means it's not a sign of demand shock or
decline or soft market is because of
this hit to this specific part of the
workforce. Similarly, and I know you
have had episodes talking about this
issue, we see the phenomenon of young
people having less hiring, particularly
college educated people, young people
not getting hired as much. And I think
there's two things going on there. One
is I mean it's real again like with
African-American unemployment. I'm not
saying it's not real. I'm just saying
it's not telling you about the demand
situation. So
>> it's idiosyncratic rather than cyclical.
>> Right. Well said. Very tech speak. Um so
you know I think part of it is that
we've the the rise in you younger people
unemployment college age younger people
unemployment has been a very steady rise
for a few years. It's actually a a very
it's not like suddenly oh it got soft.
It's been coming up slowly since roughly
2023. And to me that has to do with the
hiring and rematching coming out of co
that people moved a lot companies moved
a lot of people into new jobs and and
they hired extra people in some sense
and so there's this overhang and that's
particularly affecting young people. I
mean AI is in there. I'm just that's not
thing. So anyway, I'm not trying to
cherrypick data, but I'm just trying to
say that
>> if you match that with the more
well-known data, the layoffs are
relatively low, the wage growth is
slowing, but it's not going to zero,
that participation rate is high, that
the monthly job numbers are fluctuating,
but on the new baseline that we all
rightly should be looking at solid,
I don't see it as a weakw week labor
market.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, you just talked about the labor
side, but your forecast for 4% inflation
by the end of this year is comprised of
many different things. So, walk us
through what exactly you're looking at
to get that that call. Thanks Tracy for
the opportunity which odd lots gives to
give more than two points. Um but I I
think the message is there are if I want
to start with though is there are so
many points if you kind of step back
right and you say all right if I'm
making a forecast for inflation over the
next year or two there's how soft or
tight the labor market is there's how
hot the econom is running and those two
obviously overlap there's are we getting
supply shocks like tariffs or
anti-migration policy there's what's
fiscal policies doing then there's
what's monetary policy doing and very
importantly, how credible is it? How is
it being transmitted? So, you go down
that list and there's to me there's just
an awful lot of inflationary stories.
So, tariffs, anti-migration policy,
there was a debate or at least a bunch
of people asserting, oh, it didn't
really matter. Look, inflation's not up
that much.
Well, my view, and I argued this in a
Bloomberg Business Week piece a few
weeks ago, is that we never should have
expected
the impact of these policies to be so
fast. And in fact, if you go back, not
that we forecast it perfectly by any
means, but if you go back to the stuff
my colleagues McKinnon and Noland and
others at the Peterson Institute
published a year and a half ago on what
would be the likely effect of the
tariffs or the migration policies,
they were building in a one-year lag
from when the policies took effect. And
so, you know, roughly next quarter is
when we should start to really see the
policy hit. And we're seeing anecdotally
in the beige books from the Fed in
statements by the Amazon CEO and my
co-author on part of this Peter Orzac
who runs Lazard has many contacts in the
business community who are talking about
this. It takes time to make up your mind
what you're going to do. Even if you're
big company, let alone if you're a small
company, it's very hard. So like, do I
get a new supplier? Do I move production
to China, out of China? Do I move it
into Mexico? Do I move it into the US?
Can I find a substitute? Do I raise
prices now? Do I wait till my
competitors raise prices? Can I get an
exemption from the tariffs if I go meet
with Howard Lutnik? You know, all this
stuff takes time to work through. And
the same thing is true for and that's
even before you factor in like
inventories of imported goods and
they're waiting to see whether Trump
actually sticks with the tariffs or not
before they make a decision. And I would
argue that the same is true for migrant
families or migrant workers,
undocumented migrant workers that they
have hard to leave aside the human
aspect which is amazingly horrible. But
just on the economics
they have to make up their minds. Is ICE
really coming for me? Are they coming to
my town? Is my employer going to protect
me? How long do I have before they get
here to accumulate dollar pay before I
have to leave? Can I hide and keep
working? If I go, do I go legally? Do I
take my kids with me? Do I not take my
do I try to come back? Again, these are
irreversible decisions. It takes time
and you want to see uncertainty
change or at least get settled before
you make the decision. So to me, I think
these inflationary pressures from the
anti-migration policy and tariffs are
already here, but that they're going to
accelerate in the and be more visible.
Then to be much quicker with the other
points, fiscal policy, I think the
Republican majorities in the Congress
and the president are going to want to
pass a big blowout checks to people
ahead of the midterm election. I think
they are going to pass some restoration
of the lower middle class subsidies for
Obamacare insurance because it's really
hurting people and it's really making
people angry. [gasps]
You put those two together, that's well
towards 2% of GDP in additional deficit.
So say you risk weight it, say you put a
50% chance on the the checks being
handed out and you put, I'd say, an 80
to 90% chance on some amount of
Obamacare subsidies coming back. You put
in that weighted average, that still
gets you an additional percent plus of
GDP on the deficit that people weren't
figuring. Then you got a weaker dollar.
Then you've got the Fed. And this is
something we've talked about a few times
when you've been kind enough to have me
on. The interest rate for all Trump
talking constantly about it and
pressuring the Fed doesn't summarize
sufficiently the state of monetary
conditions in the economy. So you've got
all this private credit, you've got all
the AI investment being funded either
out of retained earnings or out of
issued bonds, not based on credit, um
not based on normal bank borrowing or or
big stuff. And as Joe says, you have a
soft housing market, but mortgage rates
in real terms have been coming down and
it's not like mortgage money is
unavailable. So it's not a tight credit
environment.
And so then finally, regrettably, we
have to take into account all the
attacks on the Fed and the changes at
the Fed. And I'm not too into
personalities. I don't think it matters
that much which individual, but the
structural forces on the Fed for change.
And you have to believe that makes the
credibility, the likelihood that they're
going to react in the right direction to
this inflation soon enough lower.
So, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom.
>> So, that was a great summary or overview
of your view and there's uh plenty of
follow-ups to ask about that, but let's
just talk about the tariff. So I
certainly take your point that it would
take any company a while before they
decide their pricing strategy.
Incidentally not you know some companies
you know about almost a year after the
tariffs are going in the other direction
>> Pepsi for example so they cut prices. So
now clearly like some companies are
decided they cut but just on tariffs you
know even theoretically like yes I can
understand the argument this is a good
reason to raise prices. On the other
hand, tariffs are a tax and generally we
think of taxes as disinflationary. They
take money out of the economy. Here's
what I guess the question is every
company would love to be able to pass on
higher costs. Does there need to be
something on the demand side for them to
be able to because another possibility
is they just have to eat it in margins
because the consumer is not willing or
you know as the Pepsi consumer evidently
they're they don't want to continue to
pay high prices for end goods like are
tariffs per se inflationary or are they
only inflationary if there's sort of a
demand boost something for like the
checks or the Obamacare subsidies coming
back etc. That's a a really good added
layer of sophistication to this, Joe.
And you're absolutely right. It varies
from company to company, from industry
to industry.
The decisions part of the
decision-making process is what is the
competitive landscape and we do see I'm
proud to say PepsiCo is one of the many
corporate supporters of the Peterson
Institute. I'm a big fan and
>> good disclosure there.
>> No, no, I have to be honest and I'm I'm
proud to be honest. All our donors are
listed on our website. But anyway,
PepsiCo is arguably facing a lot of
fundamental trends in the food industry
and having to do with GLPs, having to do
with health perceptions and things that
of course are going to overwhelm for
them and they actually are not that
exposed to tariffs compared to some
other companies cuz they're not
importing sugar and they're not
importing inputs the way say
auto company is. But anyway, but just
that that just illustrates your point
that it is going to vary from company to
company. And my argument was just that
as a general thing for any given
company, it's not a trivial decision.
You don't just go. But your point, your
further point, Joe, that it's sort of
conditional on demand is absolutely
right. So there's two aspects to that.
One is just literally what you said that
if it turns out there's slack demand,
you may not see the rise in pricing as
much because
you just the company any given company
additionally has to decide you know how
much am I going to lose market share if
I raise prices. But additionally there
is an interactive effect that when you
are when this is why I made so much
about the labor market initially with
tracing it's it's a question of not so
much the demand side as your input side
right are we in a tight labor market are
we in a tight supplies market for
commodities do these things matter and
and our expectations about inflation
in the economy more broadly moving
towards the high side and and so again
just to come back your bottom line point
is right it's interactive and that's why
when you talk about inflation you want
to have all these components
>> I have to say I spent $35 on three bags
of chips and two dips on the weekend for
the Super Bowl to be fair to be fair I
got them from a gas station so there was
a markup [snorts] but it was so worth it
so good Yeah,
>> I don't eat chips that often, but when I
do,
>> chips are so good.
>> Yeah. No, we had we had we had Fritos
scoops
>> and uh so those are so good. Really
thick Super Bowl Super Bowl.
>> Okay. Now, now we're just talking about
snack foods, which is fine.
>> Um, okay. What about tariffs? Tariff
inflation.
>> Pepsi. [laughter] Fritole. Pepsi. That's
a Pepsi product. Yeah, that's true. Just
from a math perspective, what you often
hear is that, well, you know, you might
have a price impact from tariffs, but it
doesn't matter that much because it's a
one-off and then, you know, the next
year the base effect kind of goes away.
But
>> does it matter if we get 4% at the end
of the year or would you expect this to
be a sort of the start of a durable
price increase cycle? Well, I think yes,
it it is a start of a durable, as you
put it, price increase cycle. And again,
it's partly to do with the general
conditions, and it's partly to do with
the nature of the tariffs and the shock.
So I think in a world where the labor
the labor market is not high
unemployment, lots of slack, whatever
anybody says. In a world where they are
going to be putting fiscal fuel on the
fire, in a world where whatever you
think about the transition from JPAL to
nominated Kevin Worsh and the attacks on
the Fed, you cannot believe that the
Fed's credibility of commitment to low
inflation is as strong as it was a few
years ago. All of those things suggest
that any given shock, any given price
shock will to me translate into higher
and more persistent inflation than it
would say a few years ago in a different
circumstance.
The second point is and and there's this
I forget what it's now called but there
used to be the million prices project at
Harvard Business School that's been
looking at the price pass through and
there have been others looking at it and
[clears throat] people at Peterson as
well. The the second thing is the
migration shock if it turns out they do
drive out a million people million
workers is going to have much bigger
first round effects than the tariff
shock. the tariff shock. I think
reasonable estimates are they've already
had 1 point years worth of CPI effects
roughly over the past year. I think if
if they really are pushing out the
migrants and we can go to why I keep
putting it conditionally and saying I'm
not sure they have yet, but if they
really are, we're talking about
something potentially four to six times
as large. But then the the final thing I
want to emphasize Tracy is on the when
you say about the durable
size of inflation
it is a question of
what people expect the monetary policy
response to be.
>> Yeah. And so we have a very important
lesson from the 80s from 40 years ago
last time we had high inflation in the
US even under Paul Vulker they
disinflated in 1982 after an oil shock
but they didn't take it all the way down
they stopped when it got to around 4%.
And so then when the inflation came back
in ' 85,
it turned out to be more persistent and
higher [gasps]
>> and Vulkar and the Fed had to do more to
raise rates. Most people would argue, I
mean, clearly they did raise rates more,
but most of us would argue part of the
reason for that was because it was the
second round of inflation and they
hadn't fully stomped it out the first
time. And I think you can make the case
again this is speculative but I I think
there's a historical parallel here. If
we get this kind of inflation shock now
coming it's five years or four years
instead of 3 years but four years after
the last inflation having again the
inflation not come all the way down to
2% target in this case I think the
upside risk is higher. So
>> this is interesting. You know when uh
when we were at Jackson Hole the last
time we saw you um or that we did an
episode with Emmy Nakamura and talking
about this idea of like the value of
central bank credibility and there's
like kind of a fixed stock of it or the
stock of credibility can deplete over
time and it might take a while to refill
the reservoir so to speak. So what
you're saying is sort of dovetales with
that which is that if you don't sort of
in fairly short order smash it back to
2%. that there is this sort of like
persistent cost that you might pay the
next time there's a shock
>> for that's generally what we see in the
data and professor Nakamore may have a
different take on this but but what to
my understanding of the research
including by a colleague of mine at
Peterson Joseph Gon on some of these
issues is if you fail to stomp it down
the anchoring as the phrase is of of
inflation expectations is lower and so a
lot of people focus on the U Michigan
survey of inflation expectations or the
New York Fed survey. Uh we had uh oh god
I can't remember her name I apologize
from Michigan who who runs that survey
speak at the Peterson Institute last
Friday.
>> There's a video if you want to hear and
and she can point to the fact that the
long-term inflation expectations haven't
moved that much.
My view is that only tells you so much
because it it's it's people have
rational in attention. They don't spend
their lives thinking about inflation
unless they have to spend their lives
thinking about inflation. And so the
question is more when inflation comes
how do they react? And so besides the
work of my colleague Joseph Gon there's
a professor at Berkeley Yuri Gorald
Nikenko and his co-authors who did a
really interesting paper last summer I
think ahead of Jackson Hall at a
different Fed conference showing that
there was this persistently
higher upside risk on inflation
expectations.
Since we're on monetary policy, you
touched on this earlier, but one of the
very interesting things in your argument
is, you know, you contend that the
transmission mechanism isn't quite what
it used to be,
>> possibly because of the expansion of
private debt. It's less linked to bank
rates, bank lending rates. talk more
about that because if I see an
inflationary environment and you say the
durability of that inflation depends on
what the central bank does in response
even if they raise rates
>> is that going to be enough to stamp it
out because as we've seen and we've
asked a number of central bankers this
question at this point but financial
conditions are still really really
>> exactly no I think you're absolutely
right and I know you recently did an
episode with former Fed vice chair Rich
Clara and when he was vice chair. He
tried to promote this idea of I think I
don't know if they actually called it
this but essentially a monetary
conditions index. I think it had 14
pieces to it but basically trying to get
at what you just said conceptually that
if you in the textbook the central bank
has three channels through which it
tightens policy. One is it directly
affects the amount of bank deposits and
bank lending. The second is there are
repercussions through the yield curve
that if you move the short end of the
yield curve, it decreases the further
out the yield curve in duration you go.
But there is some repercussions along
the curve. And then the third is this
expectations channel. Does do people
believe ultimately that the Fed will get
things under control?
But at the same time, that's the
textbook. The working central bankers
and this overlaps somewhat with the
people who wrote the textbooks although
I'm not one of them but the working
central bankers going back again Voke
Paul Vulker are very concerned about
monetary transmission in the plumbing
meaning which parts of the financial
system get affected how much by moves in
interest rates or quantitative
tightening or regulatory rules and so
Vulkar famously was very upset when
money market mutual funds came into play
because the idea was those wouldn't be
as affected by Fed interest rate moves.
I think a much more serious issue right
now is the existence of private credit
where not only it exists but um and is
growing
>> and is growing but that we have very
little supervisory or regulatory
transparency into it. So the central
bank or anybody doesn't really know how
much is out there, where it's going,
what terms, how how shaky some of it
might be. [snorts]
But anyway, so the point is, think about
it again with respect to the housing
market. So we had a very strong Fed
tightening a couple of years ago. And
normally up until a couple of years ago,
one of the first places you would see
that would be that there would be
layoffs in single family and general
residential construction because these
tend to be small firms that are very
credit dependent, very both demand.
Their their customers are dependent on
mortgages and supply. They need credit
to do what they do. And usually the
first one of the very first effects on
the real economy of a Fed tightening
would be contraction in that sector. We
didn't see it.
>> We saw a very large Fed tightening and
essentially no unemployment rise in in
housing and not very much change in
housing starts. And that's been
replicated across a number of sectors,
what used to be called interest rate
sensitive sectors in the economy. And so
if you go back to where I started and
you say there are these multiple
channels, right? So two of the three
channels arguably are weaker than they
used to be. So the impact on the banking
system is less representative of the
impact on credit availability in the
economy. The impact on expectations for
reasons we were just talking about may
not be as rapid or strong. Again, the
Fed can get it back. Going to how Joe
summarized Emy's work. I [clears throat]
mean, you can get it back, but you
probably have to do something to get it
back. So, you're left with this middle
channel, which is the yield curve. And
even in
normal times or or less chaotic times,
there never was a lock step between what
happened at the short end of the curve
and what happens at the long end of the
curve. and Fed uh Dallas President Lori
Logan gave a speech a few weeks ago I
think on some of the aspects of this
where she's an expert but the bottom
line I keep using that phrase sorry but
the bottom line is you I you again
directionally if the Fed tightens all
three of these channels will have some
tightening effect but there's good
reason to think that none of these
effects will be as powerful bang for
your rate hike as it used to
>> [music]
[music]
>> Let's talk about AI spend. The numbers
were already going to be eye watering
for 2026 and now they're going to be
more eyewatering than that. And we got
numbers from Alphabet and Amazon that
were just much higher than
>> Right. I mean, we're talking like, you
know, this moves GDP. This is a GDP
altering numbers. Like, talk to us about
how you see the ripple out effects from
that spending.
>> So, it's fascinating and I actually
listen to you all for some of your
insights when you talk to people more in
that space than I am as a macroeconomist
thinking about it. So, the first point
go starting again with the monetary
transmission aspect is so much of this
is self finance or easily financed. So,
so Google's now issuing I guess this
hundredyear bond. Yeah,
>> I [snorts] hope so in the sense of I
hope everybody's still around in a 100
years and gets paid back and that would
be nice.
>> I won't be I'm pretty sure.
>> Yeah. Well,
>> you know, it's a it's a British bond.
It's a sterling based bond because of
those the LDI long
>> during Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They're forced
to hold.
>> My point is like most of it has been
cash
>> of course. Yeah. Yeah. So, my my point
was even the parts that are not cash
financed are being very easily financed.
So that's the first point there. There
is no credit crowding out in the rest of
the economy because of this. There is no
credit constraint on them doing this.
That has an interesting implication
which I've mentioned at various times in
recent months that makes it all the more
striking how little investment we're
getting from the rest of the economy. I
mean, so if you think about sort of the
litany of reasons that a Trump
administration official Xanti could give
for why there should be investment boom
beyond AI, right? We've made permanent
the tax cuts that are favorable to
corporate investment. We are
deregulating. We are doing things to
make the labor market more friendly to
employers. We've got cheaper energy
prices until AI pushes up some of that.
But broadly speaking, we got cheaper
domestic energy supply and we got a Fed
that until recently looked like it was
cutting rates. So beyond AI, there
should have been an investment boom. And
my view is that a lot of the Trump
administration's creation of massive
uncertainty, including through the
tariffs and the anti-migration policy,
but in other fields as well, is why you
don't have an investment boom outside of
AI. It's not because of tight credit.
Um, and people should be taking that
more seriously. Again, that doesn't
change what you just said, Joe. It's eye
watering what AI does. That doesn't mean
the total GDP has to contract,
>> but I think people should notice the
fact that we haven't had an investment
boom. My colleague Karen Dynet Peterson
presented on some of this in her
forecast in October. We haven't had the
investment boom outside of AI. Then the
big ticket, there are a number of things
we can think about, but the big ticket
issue which some Fed officials and Trump
officials have been talking about is
productivity growth.
How much does this generate productivity
growth? How soon? How job displacing is
it? What's the effect on inflation? So,
let me give you my take. My view is
we're in the process of the baton sort
of being handed in the in the imagine a
summer Olympics a relay race and the one
runner hands the baton. I think a lot of
the labor market changes that took place
during and after co nobody knew they
would be ex anti but expost they turned
out to be pro productivity growth. there
was a lot of good reallocation of
workers and I think that's running out
because that was a one-off thing and so
now the AI is the ma is increasingly the
main source of the productivity growth
but I also think going back to something
you were saying earlier about the
tariffs when you have a supply shock
positive or negative it it's it's
indeterminate
how much of that shows up in prices
versus real things. So, like we've had
this discussion about tariffs. Could it
be a one-off?
>> Could it be recessionary from the
tariffs and therefore not price
inflationary? We can go into why I don't
think that's right, but you have to do
the same process thinking about
productivity growth. It's a positive
supply shock, but how much of it shows
up as real income gains and how much of
it shows up as disinflation has to be
determined.
And my reading of the history is when
you get a leap forward in a general
purpose technology,
you get the real income gains upfront
and you get the disinflationary part
later because I mean not all the real
income gains but it's primarily real
income gains initially because what
happens again going back to stuff we
were talking about it takes businesses a
while to figure out how do I use this
technology ology, how do I change my
production process? How do I change my
hiring and training process? What are
the new products I can offer? But
there's cool products that people want
and use right away. So, if you think
about the internet in the '90s when Solo
famously said, "The computers are
everywhere but in the statistics." Well,
you know, a bunch of us were starting to
use computers, getting productivity
gains, but it took several years before
Walmart and UPS and science firms
figured out how to make use of this and
to change their processes. So, sorry to
be so long-winded, but I think this is
overlaps with a lot of stuff that you
hear at OddLots talk about with with
some of your some of your other guests.
These are non-trivial business
decisions, non-trivial investment
decisions. And so if I'm sitting at the
Fed, yes, in theory, I don't know
whether tariffs are going to be mostly
recessionary or mostly inflationary for
the reasons I've we've discussed. I
think they're going to be mostly
inflationary starting now and less
recessionary.
If you're talking about AI, I think if
I'm a if I were a central banker again
and I had to make a call or I am making
a forecast call now, I think you're
going to see the real income effects in
the next couple years predominantly and
not so much the disinflationary effects.
Then they're coming. They're coming, but
they're not there yet.
>> Can we go back to the transmission
mechanism and the yield curve for a
second? Because one of the reasons we
wanted to talk to you, it's not just
because of the report, but also because
you're a former central banker, used to
be with the Bank of England, the
monetary policy committee over there.
There is talk at the moment of a new
Treasury accord
>> and Wars has kind of signaled some
interest in this. So that would
basically be tying the Fed's balance
sheet to Treasury financing in some way,
coordinating presumably to, you know,
lower short-term rates and allow the
Treasury to issue more bills and thereby
lower the deficit.
>> Is that a good idea?
>> No.
>> Okay. [laughter]
Explain.
>> Yeah. So during the Euro crisis when I
was at Bank of England, I gave a speech
that central bank independence is about
the power to say no. But you didn't have
to always say no, right? So you don't
want to be I made the analogy a teenager
or a toddler, but I think I use
teenager. You know, you you don't assert
your independence by no matter what your
parent says to you disagreeing. So the
idea that there should be some
coordination between Treasury and Fed or
between the central bank and the finance
ministry is not unreasonable. But the
idea that there should be an ongoing
accord as opposed to say an emergency
response during the financial crisis or
during COVID is what's scary. And it's
scary because if you go back to the work
on central bank independence, there's a
huge amount of data analysis on this and
historical records and I was one of the
many contributors to that literature.
Turns out there are two things that
predict whether a central bank is
inflationary or not. it. Yeah. And one
is does the governor or the chair get
fired and replaced a lot out of turn out
of the normal sequence? And the other is
does the central bank buy bonds pretty
directly from the Treasury.
>> And [snorts] there's whole lists of all
these other aspects of central bank
independence about voting rules and
transparency and those don't have any
predictive power. But those two things,
do you do you directly buy government
bonds and do you have a lot of turnover
at the top leadership
[snorts] do predict higher inflation and
we saw this on the leadership side in
with Erdogan and Turkey and Modi in
India in recent years where they forced
rapid turnover.
>> How many central bank heads did Turkey
actually go through? Does anyone know?
was four or five I think in India's case
it was like three and again in in very
short spans of time
>> so you know the idea that we have an
orderly transition from PAL to war at
the end of Pal's term as chair I mean
that's not what we're talking about but
I think it is important to contextualize
the the things that Treasury Secretary
Bent and the administration are talking
about visa v the Fed are things that
historically over time in other
countries have produced high inflation
So I mean I can make it more complicated
than that but just full stop. But so
then there comes the question of how
much can you fix a fiscal problem
through short-term debt management and
financial engineering,
>> right?
>> And the answer is you can't. So
generally
you and and this goes to stuff that both
Wars and Bent complained about in public
going into the elections in 2024 which
was they complained that the Yellen
Treasury was
>> financing this Treasury issuance. Yeah.
And then they they still kept issuing
lots of bills. They did the same thing.
>> Yeah. And and I beyond pointing out the
hypocrisy, which I guess is part for the
course, I think they had more validity
with what they were saying before than
what they're saying now. And and again,
it's not a good sign about the fiscal
sustainability of the US if what you're
trying to do is, you know, get the loan
with the free toaster to to bridge over
your monthly credit card bill. There is
risk to doing more short-term issuance.
So, I mean, it's worth thinking back a
few years ago, right, when rates were
incredibly low and the Treasury started
considering issuing 100-year bonds or
very long-term bonds or at least
increasing the issuance of 30 years
versus short bills to fund
infrastructure to fund long-term
investment. And there was push back from
something called the Treasury Borrower
Advisory Committee, uh, TBAC. Exactly.
And the Treasury Secretary at the time,
I think it was Jack Lou, said, "Okay,
we're not going to do it." And the push
back was twofold. First the general
principle that the US government should
be
issuing across the range of maturities
on a very deliberate basis to continue
to maintain tre the US Treasury's
international and national role as the
most liquid most deep most stable asset
in the world and that if you start
gaming it for short-term advantage you
lose that and that will show up in
higher borrowing costs because then the
number of people who park in treasuries
because it's the domestic and foreign
because it's the safe stable asset goes
down because it's less safe and less
stable. But then there was also the the
rationale that you
don't know what's going to happen. I
mean, look at the fluctuations we had
from surplus at the end of the 90s to
rising interest rates in the early 2000s
to incredibly low interest rates for a
decade after the financial crisis to now
rising. You know, this is not
smart if you can borrow long to borrow
short.
>> We are recording this on jobs day of
course the new jobs day which is
Wednesdays Wednesday.
>> Yeah. February. My mind is blown.
>> No, I don't like it. I don't like it.
>> Yeah, it feels weird. But we just got
some truth social posts out of Trump
saying, "These are great job numbers,
much better than expected. America
should therefore be paying the lowest
interest rate."
>> Yeah. And I see views uh rates as like a
reward, a reward for good work. We could
go on. I have so many questions. go on a
long time, but I wanted to sort of get
your take on especially like around
Davos, some of the tensions around
Greenland and Europe and all that. And
it occurs to me like one of the themes
of this conversation particularly as it
relates to tariffs and also immigration
is that people don't make up their minds
at once, right? Corporate leaders don't
just say, "Okay, tariffs are up."
Because these are big decisions
>> and and they're uncertain. You don't
know if Trump's going to give it away or
not.
>> Yeah, that's right. There's a huge lag
and then once you make the decision,
that's like big stakes. And I've been
thinking about this like in the context
of Europe because obviously Europe still
has this very tight economic and
security relationship with the United
States and the European leaders kind of
have to make a bet which is
>> is Trump the new normal here in the
United States or will the next president
uh have a adopt a posture an economic
and security posture that's sort of like
the old presidents and no one no one
really knows for sure but this is like a
high consequence choice to make because
if the next president is going to be
sort of a more, you know, more normie on
this stuff, then maybe, you know what,
you just sort of grin and bear it for
the next few years. And then, or at some
point, if the relationship is going to
be dramatically changed, Europe really
needs to rethink like how much it spends
on military and maybe rethink about, oh,
do we want a closer orientation with
China, whatever it is. And uh there's a
big decision to make. So, I'm curious
like your take like European leaders
right now, they haven't pulled the rip
cord yet on the United States. There's a
lot of frustration, but they haven't. We
had we still have this tight
relationship. Is it are we getting
closer to where European leaders might
think look
>> this is never going to go back maybe
sort of the carney speech is like we're
never going to go back to the old
relationship with the United States.
We're in a new world.
>> It is the great big picture question Joe
and I have been writing on this and
talking with European leaders on this. I
published a piece in foreign affairs
in September called the new economic
geography in which I talked about if I
argued that this is a fundamental
lasting change
>> because the US is ceasing to be the
insurance provider in both security and
economic terms that it was and that
I think it's very fair to say and
realistic whatever happens in terms of
successor to the current administration,
even if the
successor administration, whether it's
another Republican, a Democrat, some
kind of new party centrist, whatever it
is, is not going to immediately credibly
reverse everything that's been said and
done. [clears throat]
>> And so it's analogous, the parallel you
you were giving, I think is right. And
[clears throat] there's a fundamental
economic theory by Dixon and Pindik
called um about investment that
investment under uncertainty you delay
because in a sense it's irreversible
once you once once something happens and
you commit down a certain path. It's not
literally irreversible but it it it
locks you in. It's not just sunk cost
fallacy. It's rational. So going from
the abstract to the real, we're we're
coming up on the new Munich Security
Conference, annual Munich Security
Conference. And in March 2024,
Vice President JD Vance gave a speech
there and the preceding week in Paris in
which he basically
>> March 2025.
>> 2025, sorry. Right. We're in 2026.
You're absolutely right. March 2025. in
which he basically said, you know, NATO,
Ukraine, but NATO cannot count on us the
way they used to. And he gave arguments
for why why that was good for NATO and
good for the US and all that. We can
debate that, but the it was a very
shocking big shift. And then as you
mentioned, Prime Minister Carney, now
the most famous ex- central banker in
the world, um
gave a speech in Davos a few weeks ago
which was very much about the trying to
say for Canada, it was a general loss of
this framework that we've all functioned
in. And interestingly, almost exactly a
year ago, I was in Ottawa brought in by
the Canadian government to brief them on
the likely implications of the Trump. It
was right before the election where
Carney moved from appointed to ongoing
prime minister. But anyway, at that
time, I I you know, I was dealing with
absolutely shocked Canadians
and like you said, right? So, the first
time during Trump's one, people said
discounting the adults are in the room.
Maybe it'll change. Under Biden, things
did change, but on tariffs and a lot of
things, it had been a one-way ratchet.
They didn't go back.
>> They were upset about a lot of the IRA
stuff.
>> Absolutely. And it was unilateral and I
think shortsighted, but anyway. And the
Biden team did a lot of bad, continued a
lot of bad things and did a lot of bad
things. They weren't as hostile on the
security front. They were
transatlanticist there, but on the
economic front, they didn't really roll
back. And in some ways they made worse
some of what Trump won in. And so by the
time you get to a year ago, which is
even before Vance's Munich speech, the
Canadians are saying to themselves, "Oh
my god, we this is a perfect example. We
we we just realized we have no internet
pipes that don't run through the US. We
either have US satellites or we have US
cables. We literally have no access to
the internet without the US permission."
And that encapsulates what's going on,
right? that you took for granted that if
you were not Russia or Iran, the US
would not weaponize things against you
and that's no longer a feasible thing.
So going specifically to Europe, this is
the biggest challenge to Europe since
the war. This is a situation where a lot
of European officials,
very much in line with your
characterization, Joe, a year ago, we're
still in denial or we're still having a
lot of conversations with people like me
about is this going to last? Can we wait
it out? Is this going to turn around? At
this point, nobody believes it's going
to turn around, or at least nobody
believes it's going to turn around
sufficiently and last in a way that the
Europeans can count on whoever's next
the same way they took for granted. Now,
the Trump people would say that's good.
They're not taking us for granted. But
from an economic point of view that it
was a good thing that large parts of the
world could take the US enforcing the
rules of the game, providing some basic
security of navigating the seas and
property rights and trade relations and
access in and out of treasuries, access
in and out of US markets. That we took
all that for granted was a huge boon to
business. It was a huge boon to
investment. It was a huge boon to
two-way trade.
So this is a very big deal and so a
number of people in Europe are involved
in various projects trying to come up
with what's next and two colleagues of
mine at Peterson are very active.
Olivier Blanchard the famous French
economist who's now back in France is
leading an effort on what future for
Europe. My colleague Jacob Kirkagard
who's based in Brussels does a lot of
work on how much common European funding
is going into the military and how
sustainable is that.
The big thing, one of the things Jacob
points out is you do have a split in
Europe, not so much about how much they
distrust Trump or distrust the US, lost
faith in the US, but over how imminent
they see the military threat from say
Putin.
So the amount of spending that these
countries are doing on military is a
declining function of how close they are
to Russia.
I mean you can literally do the scatter
plot. Poland and the Baltics and Swedes
and the Norwegians. Nor Norway is not
part of Europe. It's part of NAO anyway
are spending a lot more. Germany's in
the middle. Spain and Portugal are not
spending. But you're back in a world of
that kind of re geo and geopolitics
really mattering. And the final thing I
would say in this because we're coming
up on the Munich Security Conference is
ahead of this there was an announcement
of a new idea backed by merits in
Germany and Mcronone in France of sort
of a leadership committee in Europe
moving ahead. So it would be Germany,
France, Poland, Spain, Italy, basically
the big countries plus Netherlands.
And that was a nogo
for decades in Europe
that that things had to be done by
involving everybody. Things had to be
done by qualified majority or unonymity.
And this is a statement problems are
moving too fast. We have to stand up.
And so my view, which is ultimately more
optimistic than a lot of Europeans, is
that what Europe chooses to do, they
have a lot of agency. They will have a
lot to determine the outcome of how bad
things go for them and for the rest of
the world as Trump and she end up
pursuing similar bad economic policies.
H
>> I mean it is very telling about our
current moment in time that we're
talking about the Munich Security
Conference as like a macroeconomic
indicator at all. Right. Absolutely
right.
>> Used to be just for foreign policy
wonks.
>> Exactly. Now it's for econ wonks as
well. Yeah.
>> That's right. Also, why are they holding
it on Valentine's Day weekend?
>> Oh, no. They do all these things. It's
like it's like the ECB Centra conference
is always on July 4th weekend. It's just
they ostentatiously don't watch the
Hallmark channel. It's just no good.
>> Adam Posen, thank you. That was
fantastic. That was a great
conversation. We could ask you so much
more, but really appreciate you uh
coming on OddLots again.
>> Really glad to be with you both on
OddLots. Keep up the good work and thank
you for having me.
>> All right, take care. [music]
>> Thanks so much, Adam.
>> [music]
>> Tracy, I thought that was a great
conversation. Your point there at the
end dovetailed with something else he
said about the sort of the link now
between security and macro. I was
thinking about that observation. We
should definitely do more on this. You
know, Canada not having access to the
internet unless it's through the US. So,
how do you solve that? Well, like you
spend and you build new pipes, you build
new undersea cables, you build more
satellites, but that's spending, right?
That's inflationary. Yeah. And so, you
know, again, it's the same thing with,
we talked about it with Jeff Curry.
Europe spending trillions on defense.
These concerns about whether the degree
to which countries can rely on the US
anymore. The way you address these
concerns is a lot more spending.
>> Absolutely. To me, we are seeing some
inflationary signs, right? like we
talked about them at the beginning and
you can't really ignore them. I guess
the the big question is how much of this
is like a temporary like blip in terms
of building back inventories. you know,
maybe people ran them down all last year
because they didn't know exactly what
was going to happen with tariffs, but
now now they really have to stock back
up and so you're getting this like
onetime
inflationary hike or is this the start
of something that's kind of I know we
keep using the word durable.
>> No, but it is the right qu Yeah,
totally.
>> And like if you look at something like
trucking rates and again like we're
interested in trucking rates. We did a
lot of episodes on it, but also they're
just a good macroeconomic indicator.
>> We've seen some glimmers of a recovery
there. So freight rates are starting to
go up, but everyone's kind of saying,
well, we need to see like 6 weeks of
sustained improvement. So I think that's
kind of like the question right now,
February 11th, do we get more sustained
inflationary indicators over the next
month or two?
>> Absolutely. And um you know again I you
know it's interesting even if we had had
this conversation say a month ago or
something like that when you know it
looked like maybe there was more you
know the the the story of job market
softening was less unambiguous or
something like that. You think about the
new Fed chair it's like okay do we need
rate cuts right away it's like ah 25
basis points 50 basis point maybe they
could be a little lower. It's not the
end of the world if there is a
reaceleration. If we actually are seeing
gathering steam again
>> and the incoming Fed chair still has
this impulse that like you have to like
cut rates, you have to establish. I mean
Trump joked, but not really a joke. He's
like, "Oh, I'd sue if Kevin Worsh
doesn't cut rates."
>> If you have this sort of rate cuts into
a period of we're actually seeing
acceleration that's like a very
different story and very Yeah. put more
fuel on the fire. So, a lot of sort of
interesting risks out there.
>> Yeah. People were kind of ambivalent
about a rate cut even when the labor
market was softening. Yeah, exactly.
>> And then if you say you're going to cut
rates when it's reacelerating, well,
>> we could go on.
>> Should we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
OddLots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Adam Posen. He's at Posen. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman. Dashelob Bennett at Dashbot. and
Kale Brooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLotss content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
We have a daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord.
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like
[music] it when we talk about the Munich
Security Conference as a macroeconomic
indicator, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. [music] And remember, if you
are a Bloomberg subscriber, you can
listen to all of our episodes absolutely
adree. All you need to do is find the
[music] Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcast and follow the instructions
there. Thanks for listening.
[music]
>> [music]